A pie in the Sky
================

Enrico Garaldi

.. raw:: html

  <iframe width="560" height="315"
   src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/dfi2-0m5N0E" frameborder="0"
   allow="autoplay; encrypted-media" allowfullscreen></iframe>


On large scales, the Universe resembles a giant web. But the appearance of
this cosmic web is very different when seen through different observables. To
study the evolution of the Universe, astrophysicists use large supercomputers
to run sophisticated numerical simulations, where the hydrodynamical and
radiative transfer equations are solved on a grid. The movie shows some of the
different looks of the cosmic web using a slice through the output from one of
these simulations. The distribution of ordinary matter is given by the gas
overdensity \delta_b, shown in blue-to-yellow colors. The filamentary and
self-similar structure constitutes the backbone of cosmic structures. However,
this density can not be directly observed. What telescopes can see is the
stellar light, that is shown here via the mass of stars M_* (black-to-yellow
colors): galaxies form only in the densest knots of the web and therefore have
a sparse distribution that, nevertheless, tracks the underlying matter field.
While galaxies trace the dense regions, studying the light absorption by
cosmic gas allows to determine the properties of diffuse low-density gas. For
instance, its temperature T can be determined through the Lyman-alpha
transition of neutral Hydrogen. This quantity is shown with a white-to-red
colormap and features large warm regions that are heated up by the intense
radiation coming from stars and accreting black holes. In a similar way, the
absorption and emission lines from atoms heavier than Helium ('metals' in the
astronomical jargon), allow to infer their abundance, called metallicity (Z),
which is portrayed by a blue-to-grey colormap. Since metals are produced by
exploding stars, they are mostly located in and around galaxies, where they
are brought through galactic outflows driven by stellar winds. Finally, the
future SKA telescope will enable a tomographic mapping of the distribution of
the neutral Hydrogen fraction (x_HI) in the Universe using the hyper-fine
transition of the Hydrogen atom). This quantity is depicted using a
red-to-blue color scheme. The radiation from stars and accreting black holes
turns the gas into a plasma everywhere but in the densest regions, where the
large gas reservoir effectively shields some of this gas from the incoming
radiation.


**Code and data:** `1 <https://drive.google.com/open?id=1jRb8SweYSydJYufjARoE4VCH0wm1FoQE>`__
