Songs have gotten louder over time 
==============================================


.. image:: entry_27.png
   :width: 750

Authors
-------
David Curran

Repeat recreational exposure to loud music is a key risk factor for
noise-induced hearing loss (NIHL) and represents a major public health
concern. The WHO estimates that 50% of individuals aged 12-35 in developed
nations are regularly exposed to unsafe levels of sound from personal music
players, with up to 1.1 billion youth worldwide at risk of consequent NIHL.
Few studies have examined the evolution of the underlying audio-engineering of
music, a systemic factor which may contribute to NIHL. Over time, industry
trends toward dynamic range compression may have progressively accentuated
popular music sound intensity, a phenomenon generally referred to as the
“loudness wars”. We therefore sought to quantitatively assess temporal trends
in music loudness by examining the loudness of popular music released over the
past six decades. We analyzed the Million Song Dataset, a public dataset of
tracks released from 1922 to 2011. The development and content of this dataset
have been previously described. Briefly, it consists of the metadata of
predominantly occidental popular music; loudness data are reported in decibels
relative to Full Scale (dBFS), a measure of intrinsic loudness for digital
media which is correlated to Loudness Units relative to Full Scale, the
European Broadcasting Union’s official measure of normalization for volume of
audio delivered to the human ear.  Spanning from the 1920’s to the 2010’s,
mean (standard deviation [SD]) of song loudness was modelled linearly for each
decade that contained &gt;1000 songs. Kernel density estimation was used to
normalize the frequency distribution of song loudness and create ridgeline
plots for each decade. Combined year and loudness data were available for
515,412 songs released from 1922 to 2011, with all decades from the 1950’s
onward containing 1000 songs (total n=514,579). Overall mean (SD) song
loudness was 10 (4.9) dBFS, with means ranging from -14.4 (5.1) dBFS in the
1950’s to -8.2 (4.27) dBFS in the 2010’s. When modelled linearly, mean

Loudness increased by 1.233 dBFS/10 years (95% confidence interval
1.221-1.245) (p<0.001). Social exposure to noise from personal music players
is a major cause of preventable hearing loss and a growing public health
concern. 1,2 Although higher volume levels and longer durations of exposure
are well-established user-level risk factors for NIHL, our study is the first,
to our knowledge, to demonstrate an ongoing, progressive accentuation of the
intrinsic sound intensity of popular music over time, a potentially
preventable, but music industry-level, risk factor for NIHL.


